October monthly report (#1150)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/monthly/2023-10-monthly.md

---
title: October 2023
slug: 2023-10
authors: [abailly, ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since September 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

> This month, the team released version 0.13.0, and the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month, the team released version 0.13.0, and updated the project
```

> [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/7) has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/7) to include
```

> updated with the next planned version 0.14.0:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the next planned version 0.14.0:
```

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-10-roadmap.jpg) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

#### Release 0.13.0

> - Security fixes to Hydra on-chain scripts; all of which are only exploitable by other Head participants (not any attacker)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implemented security fixes to Hydra on-chain scripts, all of which are only exploitable by other head participants (not any attacker)
```

> - Add support for (externally) committing inline datums

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support for (externally) committing inline datums
```

- Improved stability by querying the `cardano-node` at the tip

- Improved state persistence

> - See [full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.13.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/13?closed=1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- See [full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.13.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/13?closed=1).
```

#### Notable updates

> - Moved [network resilience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Moved the [network resilience
```

>   #188](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/188) out of 0.13.0 to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  #188](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/188) issue out of version 0.13.0 to
```

  allow for a quick release of the security fixes. This feature has been split

>   in two, is completed now, and will soon be released in 0.14.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in two parts, both of which are completed and will soon be included in the 0.14.0 release.
```

> - New user submitted feature idea about supporting extended keys [#1141](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1141) - at first this was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A new user submitted a feature idea about supporting extended keys [#1141](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1141). Initially
```

>   urgent, but now not anymore; needs clarification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  urgent, it's no longer a priority and requires further clarification.
```

> - Not really part of hydra version 0.14.0, but also completed is the [hydra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Although not part of Hydra version 0.14.0, the team completed the integration of [Hydra
```

>   support in kupo #1078](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1078)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  support in Kupo #1078](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1078),
```

>   which can already be used with kupo version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  which can already be used with Kupo version
```

  [2.7.0](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo/releases/tag/v2.7)

> - New [Hydra Poll dApp](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1110)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implemented a new [Hydra Poll DApp](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1110)
```

>   feature, which is an example to be demonstrated at the Cardano summit 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  feature, which is an example to be demonstrated at the Cardano Summit 2023.
```

- Realized [stateless chain observation
  #1096](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1096) as a dedicated
  feature, which will add a `hydra-chain-observer` tool and simplify upcoming

>   feature implementation related to L1 transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  feature implementation related to layer 1 transactions.
```

> - Created a feature idea item to [migrate all validators to aiken

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Created a feature idea item to [migrate all validators to Aiken
```

  #1092](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1092). This was moved

>   to > 1.0.0 though, as it would require a complete re-audit of the scripts and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to 1.0.0 though, as it would require a complete re-audit of the scripts and
```

>   there is no pressing reason for the performance improvements at this stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and there is no urgent requirement for performance improvements at this stage.
```

## Hydra development

[Issues and pull requests closed since the last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-09-30..2023-10-31)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Network resilience to node crash

> The previous month we worked on making the Hydra network resilient to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last month, the team worked on making the Hydra network resilient to
```

transient network connectivity failure (see

> [#188](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/188)), but this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#188](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/188)). However, this
```

> was only part of the story of improving the overall stability and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was just one aspect of the larger effort to improve the overall stability and
```

reliability of the network. By completing

> [#1079](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1079) we also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#1079](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1079), the team also
```

made the network resilient to arbitrary node failures, which is a much

> more likely event to happen should the network runs for a significant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more likely event to happen should the network run for a significant
```

amount of time.

Hydra nodes now persist the network messages they _send_ to peers and
together with the already present acknowledgment mechanism, this means
a node recovering from a crash can resend messages which were not
received by their peers.

> #### Hydra Poll dApp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Hydra Poll DApp
```

> As the Hydra team seeks to apply more the principles of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the Hydra team seeks to adhere more to the principles of
```

[dogfooding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food),
we wanted to upgrade our basic Hydraw application to something more

> interactive. We therefore built a [poll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interactive. We, therefore, built a [poll
```

> dApp](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1110) with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DApp](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1110) with the
```

goal of demonstrating how one can build an application living entirely

> in the front-end that can interact directly with a hydra-node, using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the frontend that can interact directly with a hydra-node, using
```

its websockets-based API. This application was also showcased at the

> [Cardano Summit 2023](https://summit.cardano.org/) where the Hydra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Cardano Summit 2023](https://summit.cardano.org/), where the Hydra
```

team delivered a masterclass.

#### Upgrade to GHC 9.6 & Brick 1.10

> This month we were able to update our compiler toolchain from GHC 9.2.8 to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month, we were able to update our compiler toolchain from GHC 9.2.8 to
```

> 9.6.3. This also required us to upgrade the hydra-tui from brick 0.73 to 1.10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9.6.3. This also required us to upgrade the hydra-tui from Brick 0.73 to 1.10
```

to stay compatible with the new version of the mtl.

> With the update to brick came a complete rewrite of the hydra-tui which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The update to Brick necessitated a complete rewrite of the hydra-tui which
```

> greatly simplifies the application logic, using brick's new elm architecture

Reviewer: ```suggestion
greatly simplifies the application logic, using Brick's new elm architecture
```

style combined with microlens-mtl.

> ## Community Update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Community update
```

This month, the monthly review meeting was almost completely covered by
demonstrations from the various teams working on and with Hydra. Don't miss out
on the demonstrations of the various community contributions and make sure to
also view the [recording][].

### Hypix

> Hypix is a continuation of the "hydraw" demonstration the team used throughout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hypix is a continuation of the 'Hydraw' demonstration the team used throughout
```

> development. The project is spear-headed by Trym Bruset and will integrate CIP68

Reviewer: ```suggestion
development. The project is spear-headed by Trym Bruset and will integrate CIP-68
```

NFTs with instant transaction processing in a Hydra head to realize
collaboratively created art pieces. The project is progressing great with an
open beta available soon.

![Hypix user interface](./img/2023-10-hypix.png) <small><center>The Hypix user interface</center></small>

### Kupo x Hydra

> Indexers of chain data, like [kupo](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexers of chain data, like [Kupo](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo),
```

are useful to enable lightweight decentralized applications like Hypix. As the
application state of Hypix, for example, is not only on the Cardano layer 1, but

> in the Hydra head, kupo was enhanced to run "in front of" a `hydra-node` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also in the Hydra head, Kupo was enhanced to run 'in front of' a `hydra-node` and
```

> provide the same API for UTxO indexed from a Hydra head. This was a [joint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide the same API for UTXOs indexed from a Hydra head. This was a [joint
```

effort](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo/pull/117) between
[@KtorZ](https://github.com/KtorZ), [@v0d1ch](https://github.com/v0d1ch) and
[@ch1bo](https://github.com/ch1bo) and has been [released in version 2.7 of

> kupo](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo/releases/tag/v2.7).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kupo](https://github.com/CardanoSolutions/kupo/releases/tag/v2.7).
```

![Kupo indexing data](./img/2023-10-kupo.gif) <small><center>Kupo indexing a Hydra head</center></small>

### Offline-mode Hydra node

[Ledger-only

> Mode](https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/10/f10-development-and-infrastructure/sundae-labs-hydra-ledger-only-mode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mode](https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/10/f10-development-and-infrastructure/sundae-labs-hydra-ledger-only-mode)
```

> for Hydra was one of the Catalyst Fund10 projects who got funded and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for Hydra was one of the Catalyst Fund10 projects that got funded and
```

work is underway to make it an integral part of Hydra software
components. A [new
ADR](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/unstable/adr/28.%20Offline%20mode)
has been proposed which details the rationale behind this new feature
and an overview of what it brings and what impacts it will have on the
hydra-node.

> Moreover, implementation is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, this implementation is
```

[underway](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1118) and
should be part of the next release. This will enable running a single

> hydra-node as a kind of "ledger-as-a-service", priming it with some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hydra-node as a kind of 'ledger-as-a-service', priming it with some
```

> UTxO and allowing clients to submit and validate transactions without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UTXOs and allowing clients to submit and validate transactions without
```

> any relationship to Layer 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any relationship to layer 1.
```

### Voting on Hydra

The
[Hydra-for-voting](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/hydra-voting-poc)
project has been started earlier this year as a proof-of-concept to
explore how a Hydra Head could help improve the voting or rather
tallying process for Catalyst and other large-scale on-chain
decision-making process. It's been on pause for a few months due to
other priorities but it's been revived recently and put to use to
tally votes for the Cardano Summit's awards recipients.

> This development effort lead to a couple new features and fixes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This development effort led to a couple of new features and fixes:
```

* The ability to [submit

>   transaction](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1111)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a transaction](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1111)
```

>   for L1 using "standard" CBOR-hex format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for layer 1 using 'standard' CBOR-hex format
```

* Upgrade to the checked-in [protocol
  parameters](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1117)
  used by demo network which were out of sync with the internal ledger
  version

> * Discussion on the usage of [Extended payment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Discussion on the usage of [extended payment
```

  keys](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1141) in

>   relationship with Hydra Head protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in relation to the Hydra Head protocol
```

![Hydra voting UI](./img/hydra-voting.png) <small><center>Hydra Tallying UI</center></small>

> ### zkSNARKs on Hydra

Reviewer: The IOG style guide suggests using 'ZK Snarks' as it's more readable and simpler for the user. I'd suggest using 'ZK Snarks' for consistency, since this is how we've been writing it in numerous articles and Midnight docs, for example. I am leaving a decision with you. Thanks!

> The team started discussing with another Catalyst Fund10 project that

Reviewer: Suggest to update this paragraph thus:
'The team has initiated discussions with another funded Catalyst Fund10 project, exploring the implementation of a [zero-knowledge proof system](https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/10/f10-development-and-infrastructure/a-zero-knowledge-proof-framework-for-cardano-based-on-hydra-and-zk-snarks) for Cardano, utilizing Hydra and ZK Snarks. At this early stage, there is minimal progress to display, but the team is eager to start the development of this promising tool.'

got funded, experimenting with a [zero-knowledge proof
system](https://projectcatalyst.io/funds/10/f10-development-and-infrastructure/a-zero-knowledge-proof-framework-for-cardano-based-on-hydra-and-zk-snarks)
for Cardano implemented within a Hydra Head. There's not much to show
yet, as the project is just at its onset, but the team is eager to
start development on this exciting tool.

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for October 2023 was held on 2023-10-30 via Google
Meet with these [slides][slides] and the [recording][recording].

As mentioned above, the meeting was about 45 minutes of demonstrations - which

> clearly shows that we are in the wake of Catalyst fund 10 where several project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clearly shows that we are in the wake of Catalyst Fund10 where several project
```

proposals involving Hydra and Mithril got funded and at the same time everyone

> is preparing for the Cardano Summit 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was preparing for the Cardano Summit 2023.
```

With this many community contributions and projects moving forward, there was
not much time to discuss the Hydra roadmap or go into details about Mithril
project status. This is great!

Besides, the project roadmaps seem to be well aligned where our next features

> in-line are most anticipated (incremental de-/commits) and adoption of Mithril

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in-line are most anticipated (incremental de-/commits) and the adoption of Mithril
```

is showing a healthy level with clear next steps and features ahead.

It is getting increasingly hard to keep track of all the new developments around
Hydra. However, that is also often not needed and the Cardano builders just set
off and [build
things](https://twitter.com/AltiMario/status/1711738372320825827?s=20) using
Hydra these days.

November will start with the Cardano Summit, likely yielding even more feedback

> and feature ideas from users, before we're looking at a few good weeks of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and feature ideas from users. Following this, there will be several productive weeks 
```

> feature development before the usual Christmas and New-Year breaks across teams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
focused on feature development before the usual Christmas and New Year breaks across the teams.
```
